<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V: The Priestess</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Priestess</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>While Henry was inquiring into the market value of the dirt which he himself had amassed, the new <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward went upstairs to inspect her best bedroom. It was empty, but electric current was burning away in a manner to call forth just criticism from her husband. The room was incredibly clean, and had a bright aspect of freshness and gaiety which delighted Violet. She said to herself: “This vacuum business was a great idea of mine. Dangerous; but it’s gone off very well.” Already she realized, though not quite fully, that she had passed under the domination of her bland Henry. It was as if she had entered a fortress and heard the self-locking gates thereof clang behind her. No escape! But in the fortress she was sheltered; she was safe.</p>
			<p>According to a prearrangement, certain dispositions had been made in the bedroom. On the bed was spread a luxurious and brilliant eiderdown quilt⁠—Violet’s private possession, almost her only possession beyond clothes, cash, and money invested. Her three trunks were deposited in a corner. The wardrobe had been cleared of books, and one chest of drawers cleared of Earlforwardian oddments, and Violet, having doffed her street attire, began to unpack in the cold, which she did not notice.</p>
			<p>She hoped that Henry would give her time to feel at home in the chamber. She was sure, indeed, that he would, for he could practise the most delicate considerations. Before deciding which drawers should hold which clothes, she laid out some of the garments on the bed, and this act seemed to tranquillize her. Then she noticed that an old slipper had been tied by a piece of pink ribbon to the head-rail of the bed. It was a much-worn white satin slipper, and had once shod the small foot of some woman who understood elegance. Elsie’s thought! Elsie’s gift! It could have come from none but Elsie. Elsie must have bought it, and perhaps its fellow, at the secondhand shop up the King’s Cross Road, past the police-station. And Elsie must also have bought the pink ribbon.</p>
			<p>Violet was touched. She wanted to run out and say something nice to Elsie, wherever Elsie might be, but she wanted still more to stay in the bedroom and think. She enjoyed being in the bedroom alone. She glanced with pleasure at the shut door, the drawn blind, the solidity of the walls and of the furniture. And she thought of her first honeymoon. A violent, extravagant and passionate week at Southend! What excursions. What distractions! What fishings! What tragicomical seasickness! What winkle-eatings! What promenades and rides on the pier! What jocularities! What gigglings and what enormous laughter! What late risings! What frocks and hats! What hair-brushings! What fastenings of frocks! What arrogant confidence in one’s complexion! What emancipations! What grand, free, careless abandonments to the delight of life! What sudden tendernesses! What exhaustless energy! What youth!⁠ ⁠… And then the swift change in the demeanour of the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arb when they got into the London train. Realization then that the man who could play and squander magnificently could also work and save magnificently! A man, in fact, the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arb; and never without a grim humour unlike anybody else’s! And he was the very devil sometimes, especially at intervals during the few days when he was making up his mind to cut his corns.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>She did not gaze backward on that honeymoon with pangs of regret. No! She was not that kind of woman. As she advanced from one time of life to another she had the common sense of each age. She did not mourn the Southend hoydenish bride who knew nothing. She had a position now, both moral and material. She could put honeymoons in their right perspective. The honeymoon which she was at that moment in the midst of had certainly some remarkable characteristics. That is to say, it was a rather funny sort of honeymoon. But what matter? She was happy⁠—not as the Southend bride had been happy, but still happy. She knew that she could comprehend Henry just as well as she had comprehended the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arb. On the subject of men she was catholic. She could submit in one way to one and in another way to another; and the same for manoeuvring them. Look at what she had by audacity accomplished in the very first hours of this second marriage! Cleanliness! The brilliance of the results of scientific cleaning astonished even herself, far surpassing her expectations.</p>
			<p>And the old satin shoe influenced her. There was something absurd, charming, romantic and inspiring about that shoe. It reminded Violet that security and sagacity and affectionate constancy could not be the sole constituents of a satisfactory existence. Grace, fancifulness, impulsiveness, some foolishness, were needed too. She saw the husband, the house, and even the business, as material upon which she had to work, constructively, adoringly, but also wilfully, and perhaps a bit mischievously. What could be more ridiculous than an old shoe tied to a respectable bedstead? And yet it had changed Violet’s mood. For her it had most mysteriously changed the mood of the domestic interior, of all Clerkenwell. It helped Violet to like Clerkenwell, an unlikeable place in her opinion.</p>
			<p>After a long time, and reluctantly, she went downstairs again. Nobody had disturbed her⁠—neither her husband nor Elsie nor the workmen. She had heard various movements beyond the citadel of the bedroom⁠—ascents, descents, bumpings⁠—and she now found the upper floors in darkness; the upper floors were finished. The shop also was apparently finished, with the exception of the principal window. She paused at the turn of the stairs and watched her husband attentively watching the operation on the windowful of books. Two workmen were engaged upon it. One handled the books in batches of ten or a dozen; the other manipulated the cleansing, swishing nozzle. Both men seemed to be experts, laborious, conscientious and exact. The volumes were replaced with precision. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Henry Earlforward, in a critical temper, as became a merchant over an important affair which affected him closely but upon which he had been in no wise consulted, stood ready to pounce upon the slightest error or carelessness. Well, he found no occasion to pounce; the bland demon in him was foiled of its spring. He moved away, disappointed, admiring, and caught sight of Violet. His face welcomed her appearance. Undoubtedly he was pleased with and impressed by her capacity, in addition to being in love with her. She looked down demurely, perturbed by the ardour of his glance.</p>
			<p>“Been putting things to right in the bedroom?” he murmured, approaching her.</p>
			<p>She nodded. He lifted his hand to her shoulder, and there it rested for a moment. She wished to heaven the interminable job was finished and they could walk about the transformed shop alone together.</p>
			<p>“Look here,” he murmured; the men at the window could not possibly distinguish what he was saying.</p>
			<p>“Yes?”</p>
			<p>He led her to a corner. One of the sacks in which books were delivered hid a fairly large cubical object. He pulled off the sack and disclosed an old safe which she had never seen before.</p>
			<p>“I bought it yesterday,” said he, “and they delivered it this morning, I suppose.” Bending down, he took a key from his pocket, unlocked the safe, and swung open the massive door. “Two drawers, you see, and two compartments besides.”</p>
			<p>“Very nice, I’m sure.”</p>
			<p>He relocked the safe and handed her the key, which was very bright.</p>
			<p>“It’s for you,” he said. “A little wedding-present. You must decide where you’d like to have it. If you want it upstairs, I might get some of these chaps to carry it up before they go. Cheaper than getting men in on purpose. And it’s no featherweight, that safe isn’t.”</p>
			<p>Violet was startled almost out of her self-possession. She held the key as though she did not know what to do with it. She gave a mechanical smile, very unlike the smile whose vivacity drew crinkling lines from all parts of her face to the corners of her eyes and of her mouth. The present was totally unexpected. He had said not one word as to presents; certainly he had not questioned her about her preferences, nor shown even indirectly any kind of curiosity in this regard. She had comprehended that he wished neither to bestow nor to receive, and she was perfectly reconciled to his idiosyncrasy. After all, was she not at that moment wearing, without resentment or discomfort, the wedding-ring to obtain which he had sold its predecessor? And yet he had conceived the plan of giving her a present and had executed it in secret, as such plans on such occasions ought to be executed. And he was evidently pleased with his plan and proud of it.</p>
			<p>How many husbands would have given a safe to their wives so that the dear creatures might really possess their property in privacy and independence? Very few. The average good husband would have expected his wife to hand over all that she had into his own safekeeping⁠—not for his own use⁠—but she would have had to ask him for what was hers, and in giving her what was hers he would have had the air of conferring a favour. Henry was not like that. Henry, she knew, admired her for her possessions as well as for her personality. And he had desired to insist on them in a spectacular manner. She was touched. Yes, she was touched; because she understood his motives; saw the fineness, the chivalry, in his motives.</p>
			<p>When she had thanked him she said:</p>
			<p>“I think I shall have it in the bathroom, under the window; there is plenty of room there.”</p>
			<p>Her practical sagacity had not failed her. In the bathroom she could employ her safe, study the contents of her safe, and take from them or add to them, unsurveyed, according to her most free fancy. Whereas, if the safe was in the bedroom or in the dining-room, or side by side with Henry’s safe in the office⁠—well, you never knew! He agreed instantly with her suggestion.</p>
			<p>“If I were you,” said he, “I should get your things out of that Cornhill safe-deposit place at once.”</p>
			<p>The late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arb had always been in favour of a “safe-deposit place” for securities and valuables. The arrangement was beyond doubt best for a nomad, but in addition, with his histrionic temperament, he had loved the somewhat theatrical apparatus of triple security with which safe-deposit companies impressed their clients. He had loved descending into illuminated steel vaults, and the smooth noise of well-oiled locks and the signing and countersigning, and the surveillance, and the surpassing precautions. Violet had loved it also. It magnified riches. It induced ecstatic sensations.</p>
			<p>But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Henry Earlforward had other views. He held that the rent which you had to pay for a coffer in a safe-deposit was excessive, and that to pay it was a mere squandering of money in order to keep money, and quite irrational, quite ridiculous⁠—indeed, a sort of contradiction in terms. That <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb should patronize a safe-deposit company had seemed to offend him; that his wife should patronize a safe-deposit company gave him positive pain. Imagine having to take motorbuses and trams and spend money and half a day of time whenever you wanted to open your own coffer! Violet had listened to him at length on this topic.</p>
			<p>She was pleasantly touched now, but simultaneously she was frightened again. Standing close to him in the gloom of the corner, dangling the key on its bit of string, glancing at his fresh, full-lipped, grey-bearded, kindly face, and at his bland little eyes which rested on her with love, she was frightened and even appalled. She had made him a present of a scientific spring-cleaning, and he had given her a safe, on their wedding day! It was terrible, it was horrible! Why? Eminently sensible gifts, both, surely! Not more prosaic than those very popular and well-accepted presents, a pair of fish-carvers, a patent carpet-sweeper, a copper coal-scuttle! No, possibly not more prosaic than those.⁠ ⁠… And yet, terrible! No doubt she would not have thought them so horrible if she had not seen that secondhand satin shoe hanging on the bedstead by a piece of pink ribbon. She knew that the excellent, trustworthy and adoring man who was the safe-deposit in which she had deposited herself had no suspicion of the nature of her thoughts. And his innocence, his simplicity, his blindness⁠—call it what you please⁠—only intensified her perturbation. He turned away to speak to the workmen about moving the safe.</p>
			<p>At a later hour, soon after the workmen and the engines and the hose and all the apparatus of purification had vanished from Riceyman Steps, to the regret of a persistent crowd which had been enjoying an absolutely novel sensation, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Henry Earlforward, who were alone and rather self-conscious and rather at a loss for something to do in the beautiful shut shop, heard steps on the upper stairs. Elsie! They had forgotten Elsie! It was not a time for them to be thoughtful of other people. Elsie presently appeared on the lower stairs, and was beheld of both her astonished employers. For Elsie was clothed in her best, and it was proved that she indeed had a best. Neither Henry nor Violet had ever seen the frock which Elsie was wearing. Yet it was obviously not a new frock. It had lain in that tin trunk of hers since more glorious days. Possibly Joe might have seen it on some bright evening, but no other among living men. Its colour was brown; in cut it did not bear, and never had borne, any relation to the fashions of the day. But it was unquestionably a best dress. Over the façade of the front Elsie displayed a garment still more surprising; namely, a white apron. Now in Clerkenwell white aprons were white only once in their active careers, and not always even once. White aprons in Clerkenwell were white (unless bought “shop-soiled” at a reduction) for about the first hour of their first wearing. They were, of course, washed, rinsed and ironed, and sometimes lightly starched, but they never achieved whiteness again, and it was impossible that they should do so. A whitish grey was the highest they could reach after the first laundry. Elsie therefore was wearing a new apron; and, in fact, she had purchased it with her own money under the influence of her modest pride in forming a regular part of a household comprising a gentleman and lady freshly united in matrimony. She had also purchased a cap, but at the last moment, after trying it on, had lacked the courage to keep it on; she felt too excessively odd in it. She was carrying a parcel in her left hand, and the other was behind her back. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward, at sight of her, guessed part of what was coming, but not the more exciting part.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Elsie!” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward. “There you are! I fancied you were out.”</p>
			<p>“No, ’m,” said Elsie, in her gentle, firm voice. “But I wasn’t expecting you and master home so early, and as soon as you came I run upstairs to change.”</p>
			<p>With that Elsie, from the advantage of three stairs, suddenly showed her right hand, and out of a paper bag flung a considerable quantity of rice on to the middle-aged persons of the married. She accomplished this gesture with the air of a benevolent priestess performing a necessary and gravely important rite. Some of the rice stuck on its targets, but most of it rattled on the floor and rolled about in the silence. Indeed, there was quite a mess of rice on the floor, and the pity seemed to be that the vacuum-cleaners had left early.</p>
			<p>Violet was the first to recover from the state of foolish and abashed stupefaction into which the deliberate assault had put man and wife. Violet laughed heartily, very heartily. Her mood was transformed again in an instant into one of gaiety, happiness, and natural ease. It was as if a sinister spell had been miraculously lifted. Henry gradually smiled, while regarding with proper regret this wanton waste of a health-giving food such as formed the sole nourishment of many millions of his fellow-creatures in distant parts of the world. Sheepishly brushing his clothes with his hand, he felt as though he was dissipating good rice-puddings. But he, too, suffered a change of heart.</p>
			<p>“I had to do it, because it’s for luck,” Elsie amiably explained, not without dignity. Evidently she had determined to do the wedding thoroughly, in spite of the unconventionalities of the contracting parties.</p>
			<p>“I’m sure it’s very kind of you,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward concurred.</p>
			<p>“And here’s a present from me,” Elsie continued, blushing, and offering the parcel.</p>
			<p>“I’m sure we’re very much obliged,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward, taking the parcel. “Come into the back room, Elsie, and I’ll undo it. It’s very heavy. No, I’d better not hold it by the string.”</p>
			<p>And in the office the cutting of string and the unfolding of brown paper and of tissue paper disclosed a box, and the opening of the box disclosed a wedding-cake⁠—not a large one, true, but authentic. What with the shoe and the rice and the cake, Elsie in the grand generosity of her soul must have spent a fortune on the wedding, must have exercised the large munificence of a Rothschild⁠—and all because she had faith in the virtue of the ancient proprieties appertaining to the marriage ceremony. She alone had seen <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward as a bride and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward as a bridegroom, and the magic of her belief compelled the partners also to see themselves as bride and bridegroom.</p>
			<p>“Well, Elsie,” Violet burst out⁠—and she was deeply affected⁠—“I really don’t know what to say. It’s most unexpected, and I don’t know how to thank you. But run and get a knife, and we’ll cut it.”</p>
			<p>“It must be cut,” said Elsie, again the priestess, and she obediently ran off to get the knife.</p>
			<p>“Well, well!⁠ ⁠… Well, well!” murmured Henry, flabbergasted, and blushing even more than his wife had blushed. The pair were so disturbed that they dared not look at each other.</p>
			<p>“You must cut it, ’m,” said Elsie, returning with the knife and a flat dish.</p>
			<p>And <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Earlforward, having placed the cake on the dish, sawed down into the cake. She had to use all her strength to penetrate the brown; the top icing splintered easily, and fragments of it flew about the desk.</p>
			<p>“Now, Elsie, here’s your slice,” said Violet, lifting the dish.</p>
			<p>“Thank ye, ’m. But I must keep mine. I’ve got a little box for it upstairs.”</p>
			<p>“But aren’t you going to eat any of it?”</p>
			<p>“No, ’m,” with solemnity. “But <em>you</em> must.⁠ ⁠… I’ll just taste this white part,” she added, picking up a bit of icing from the desk.</p>
			<p>The married pair ate.</p>
			<p>“I think I’ll go now, ’m, if you’ll excuse me,” said Elsie. “But I’ll just sweep up in the shop here first.” She was standing in the doorway.</p>
			<p>They heard her with hand-brush and dustpan collecting the scattered food of the Orient. She peeped in at the door again.</p>
			<p>“Good night, ’m. Good night, sir.” She saluted them with a benignant grin in which was a surprising little touch of naughtiness. And then they heard her receding footfalls as she ascended cautiously the dark flights of stairs and entered into her inviolable private life on the top floor.</p>
			<p>“It would never have done not to eat it,” said Violet.</p>
			<p>“No,” Henry agreed.</p>
			<p>“She’s a wonder, that girl is! You could have knocked me down with a feather.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“I wonder where she bought it.”</p>
			<p>“Must have gone up to King’s Cross. Or down to Holborn. King’s Cross more likely. Yesterday. In her dinner-hour.”</p>
			<p>“I’m hungry,” said Violet.</p>
			<p>And it was a fact that they had had no evening meal, seeing that they had expressly announced their intention of “eating out” on that great day.</p>
			<p>“So must you be, my dear,” said Violet.</p>
			<p>There they were, alone together on the ground-floor, with one electric bulb in the back room and one other, needlessly, lighting the middle part of the cleansed and pleasant shop. They could afford to be young and to live perilously, madly, absurdly. They lost control of themselves, and gloried in so doing. The cake was a danger to existence. It had the consistency of marble, the richness of molasses, the mysteriousness of the enigma of the universe. It seemed unconquerable. It seemed more fatal than daggers or gelignite. But they attacked it. Fortunately, neither of them knew the inner meaning of indigestion. When Henry had taken the last slice, Violet exclaimed like a child:</p>
			<p>“Oh, just one tiny piece more!” And with burning eyes she bent down and bit off a morsel from the slice in Henry’s hand.</p>
			<p>“I am living!” shouted an unheard voice in Henry’s soul.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
