<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: The Carving-Knife</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Carving-Knife</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The two women were working together in a living-room over the shop. An oil-lamp had been hung on a hook which would have held a curtain loop had there been any curtains. The lamp, tilted slightly forward, had a round sheltered reflector behind it. Thus a portion of the lower part of the room was brilliantly lighted and all the rest of the room in shadow. Elsie was scrubbing the floor in the full glare of the reflector. She scrubbed placidly and honestly, with no eagerness, but with no sign of fatigue. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb sat in the fireplace with her feet upraised out of the damp on the rail of a chair, and cleaned the mantelpiece. She had worked side by side with Elsie through the evening, silent sometimes, vivaciously chatty sometimes⁠—desirous generally of collecting useful pieces of local information. Inevitably a sort of community had established itself between the two women. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb would talk freely and yet give nothing but comment. Elsie talked little and yet gave many interesting facts.</p>
			<p>“Let me see,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb with a casual air. “It’s that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward you say you work for in the mornings, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“But I told you I did when you sent me in about the book, ’m. And I told you before that, too,” Elsie answered, surprised at such forgetfulness.</p>
			<p>“Oh, of course you did. Well, does he live all alone?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, ’m.”</p>
			<p>“And what sort of a gentleman is he?”</p>
			<p>Elsie, instinctively loyal, grew cautious.</p>
			<p>“He’s a very nice gentleman, ’m.”</p>
			<p>“Treats you well, does he?”</p>
			<p>“Well, of course, ’m, he has his ways. But he’s always very nice.”</p>
			<p>“Nice and polite, eh?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, ’m. And I’ll say this, too: he never tries to take any liberties. No, that he doesn’t!”</p>
			<p>“And so he has his ways. Is he eccentric?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <em>no</em>, ’m! At least, I don’t know what you mean, ’m, I’m sure I don’t. He’s very particular in some things; but, then, in plenty of things he takes no notice of you, and you can do it or leave it <em>as</em> you choose.” Elsie suspected and mildly resented a mere inquisitiveness on the part of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb, and added quickly: “I think this floor’s about done.”</p>
			<p>She wrung a cloth out in the pail at her right hand. The clock below struck its quick, wiry, reverberating note. It kept on striking.</p>
			<p>“That’s never eleven o’clock!” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb exclaimed, completely aware that it was eleven o’clock. “How time flies when you’re hard at it, doesn’t it?”</p>
			<p>Elsie silently disagreed with this proposition. In her experience of toil she had found that time lagged.</p>
			<p>“Well, Elsie, I’m sure I’m much obliged to you. I can finish myself. Don’t you stay a minute longer.”</p>
			<p>“No, ’m,” said Elsie, who had exchanged three hours’ overtime for sixpence and a slice of ham.</p>
			<p>At this moment, and before Elsie had raised her damp knees from the damp floor, a very sharp and imperious tapping was heard.</p>
			<p>“My gracious! Who’s that?”</p>
			<p>“It’s the shop door,” said Elsie.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb decided the procedure quite cheerfully. She was cheerful because the living-room, with other rooms, was done, and in a condition fit to be seen by possible purchasers of her premises and business; she had no intention to live in the living-room herself. And also she was cheerful because of a wild and silly, and yet not wholly silly, idea that the rapping at the shop door came from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward, who had made for himself some absurd manlike excuse for calling again that night. She had, even thus early, her notions about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward. The undying girl in her ran downstairs with a candle and unlocked the shop door. As she opened it a man pushed forward roughly into the shop⁠—not <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward; a young man with a dangerous look in his burning eyes, and gestures indicating dark excitement.</p>
			<p>“What do you want?” she demanded, trying to control the situation firmly and not succeeding.</p>
			<p>The young man glanced at her. She perceived that he carried a torn umbrella and that his clothes were very wet. She heard the heavy rain outside.</p>
			<p>“You can’t come in here at this time of night,” she added. “The shop’s closed.”</p>
			<p>She gave a sign for him to depart. She actually began to force him out; mere temerity on her part. She thought:</p>
			<p>“Why am I doing this? He might attack me.”</p>
			<p>Instead of departing the young man dropped his umbrella and sprang for the big carving-knife which she had left on the counter after cutting the slice of ham for Elsie. In that instant <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb decided absolutely and without any further vacillation that she would sell the place, sell it at once, and for what it would fetch. Already she had been a little alarmed by the sinister aspect of several of her customers. She remembered the great Clerkenwell murder. She saw how foolish she had been ever to come to Clerkenwell at all. The man waved the carving-knife over his head and hers.</p>
			<p>“Where’s Elsie?” he growled savagely, murderously.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb began dimly to understand.</p>
			<p>“This comes of taking charwomen you don’t know,” she said pathetically to herself. “And yet I could have sworn by that girl.”</p>
			<p>Then a strong light shone in the doorway leading to the backroom. Elsie stood there holding the wall-lamp in her hand. As soon as he caught sight of her the man, still brandishing the knife, ran desperately towards her. She hesitated and then retreated a little. The man plunged into the room and banged the door.</p>
			<p>After that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb heard not a sound. She was nonplussed, helpless and panic-stricken. Ah! If the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arb had been alive, how he would have handled the affair! Not by force, for he had never been physically strong. But by skill, by adroitness, by rapid chicane. Only she could not imagine precisely <em>what</em> the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arb would have done in his unique and powerful sagacity. She was overwhelmed by a sudden and final sense of the folly, the tragedy, of solitary existence for a woman like her. She had wisdom, energy, initiative, moral strength, but there were things that women could do and things that women could not do; and a woman who was used to a man needed a man for all sorts of purposes, and she resolved passionately that she would not live alone another day longer than she could help.</p>
			<p>This resolve, however, did not mitigate her loneliness in the candle-lit shop with the shut door in front of her hiding dreadful matters and the rain pelting on the flagstones of Riceyman Steps. She looked timidly forth; a policeman might by Heaven’s mercy be passing. If not, she must run in the wet, as she was, to the police-station. She then noticed a faint light in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward’s shop, and dashed across. Through the window she could see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward walking in his shop with a candle in his hand. She tattooed wildly on the window. A tramcar thundered down King’s Cross Road, tremendously heedless of murders. After a brief, terrible interval the lock of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward’s portal grated, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward appeared blandly in the doorway holding the candle.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward!” she cried, and stepped within, and clutched his sleeve and told him what had occurred. And as she poured out the words, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward kept apparently all his self-possession and bland calm, an exquisite and intense feeling of relief filled her whole being.</p>
			<p>“I’ll come over,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward. “Rather wet, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>He cut a fine figure in the eyes of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb. He owed his prestige at that moment, however, not to any real ability to decide immediately and courageously upon the right, effective course to follow, but to the simple fact that his reactions were very slow. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward was always afraid after the event. He limped vigorously into the dangers of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb’s dwelling with his placidity undisturbed by the realization of those dangers. And he had no conception of what he should do. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb followed timorously.</p>
			<p>The door into <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb’s backroom was now wide open; the lamp near the carving-knife burnt on the white table there. Also the candle was still burning in the shop, but the umbrella had vanished from the shop floor. The backroom was empty. No symptom of murder, nor even of a struggle! Only the brief, faint rumble of an Underground train could be heard and felt in the silence.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he’s chased her upstairs.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll go and see. Anyhow, he’s left the knife behind him.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward picked up the carving-knife, and thereby further impressed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb.</p>
			<p>“Take the lamp,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb.</p>
			<p>“Nobody up here!” he called from the first floor. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb ascended. Together they looked into each room.</p>
			<p>“She’s taken her jacket!” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb, noticing the empty peg behind the door when they came down again to the backroom.</p>
			<p>“Ah! That’s better,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward commented, expelling breath.</p>
			<p>“I’ve left my candle lighted,” he said a moment later. “I’ll go and blow it out.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I’m coming back. I’m coming back.”</p>
			<p>While he was gone <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb had a momentary lapse into terror. Suppose⁠—! She glimpsed again the savage and primeval passion half-disclosed in the gestures and the glance of the young man, hints of forces uncontrollable, terrific and fatal.</p>
			<p>“I expect he’s that young fellow that’s running after her,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward when he returned. “Seems he’s had shell-shock! So I heard. She’ll have to leave him alone⁠—that’s clear!” He was glad to think that he had found a new argument to help him to persuade Elsie not to desert him.</p>
			<p>“She seemed to be so <em>respectable</em>!” observed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb.</p>
			<p>“Well, she is!”</p>
			<p>“Poor girl!” sighed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb; she felt a genuine, perturbing compassion for Elsie. “Ought I to go and tell the police, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward?”</p>
			<p>“If I were you I shouldn’t have the police meddling. It’s all right.”</p>
			<p>“Well, anyhow, I can’t pass the night here by myself. No, I can’t. And that’s flat!” She smiled almost comically.</p>
			<p>“You go off to bed,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earlforward, with a magnificent wave of the hand. “I’ll make myself comfortable in this rocking-chair. I’ll stop till daylight.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb said that she couldn’t think of such a thing, and that he was too kind. He mastered her. Then she said she would put a bit of coal on the fire.</p>
			<p>“You needn’t.” He stopped her. “I’ll go across and get my overcoat and a quilt, and lock up there. It’ll be all right. It’ll be all right.”</p>
			<p>He reappeared with his overcoat on and the quilt a little rain-spotted. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Arb was wearing a long thick mantle.</p>
			<p>“What’s this?” he asked. “What’s the meaning of this?”</p>
			<p>“I couldn’t leave you to sit up by yourself. I couldn’t, really. I’m going to sit up too.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
